---
title: "Remembering Charles Beeler"
date: "2024-11-12"
---

= Remembering Charles Beeler

_Note: This was co-authored with Steve Tuck, and originally appeared
https://oxide.computer/blog/remembering-charles-beeler[on the Oxide blog]._

We are heartbroken to relay that Charles Beeler, a friend and early investor
in Oxide, https://www.rallyventures.com/in-memoriam-charles-beeler/[passed
away in September after a battle with cancer].  We lost Charles far too soon;
he had a tremendous influence on the careers of us both.

Our relationship with Charles dates back nearly two decades, to his
involvement with the ACM Queue board where he met Bryan.  It was unprecedented
to have a venture capitalist serve in this capacity with ACM, and Charles
brought an entirely different perspective on the practitioner content.  A
computer science pioneer who also served on the board took Bryan aside at one
point:  "Charles is one of the good ones, you know."

When Bryan joined Joyent a few years later, Charles also got to know Steve
well.  Seeing the promise in both node.js and cloud computing, Charles became
an investor in the company.  When companies hit challenging times, some
investors will hide -- but Charles was the kind of investor to figure out how
to fix what was broken.  When Joyent needed a change in executive leadership,
it was Charles who not only had the tough conversations, but led the search
for the leader the company needed, ultimately positioning the company for
success.

Aside from his investment in Joyent, Charles was an outspoken proponent of
node.js, becoming an organizer of the Node Summit conference.  In 2017, he
asked Bryan to deliver the conference's keynote, but by then, the relationship
between Joyent and node.js had become... complicated, and Bryan felt that it
probably wouldn't be a good idea.  Any rational person would have dropped it,
but Charles persisted, with characteristic zeal:  if the Joyent relationship
with node.js had become strained, so much more the reason to speak candidly
about it!  Charles prevailed, and the resulting talk,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xhx970_JKX4[Platform as Reflection of Values],
became one of Bryan's most personally meaningful talks.

Charles's persistence was emblematic:  he worked behind the scenes to
encourage people to do their best work, always with an enthusiasm for the
innovators and the creators.  As we were contemplating Oxide, we told Charles
what we wanted to do long before we had a company.  Charles laughed with
delight: "I hoped that you two would do something big, and I am just so happy
for you that you're doing something so ambitious!"

As we raised seed capital, we knew that we were likely a poor fit for Charles
and his fund.  But we also knew that we deeply appreciated his wisdom and
enthusiasm; we couldn't resist pitching him on Oxide.  Charles approached the
investment in Oxide as he did with so many other aspects:  with curiosity,
diligence, empathy, and candor.  He was direct with us that despite his
enthusiasm for us personally, Oxide would be a challenging investment for his
firm.  But he also worked with us to address specific objections, and
ultimately he won over his partnership.  We were thrilled when he not only
invested, but pulled together a syndicate of like-minded technologists and
entrepreneurs to join him.

Ever since, he has been a huge Oxide fan.  Befitting his enthusiasm, one of
his final posts expressed his enthusiasm and pride in what the Oxide team has
built.

Charles, thank you.  You told us you were proud of us -- and it meant the
world.  We are gutted to no longer have you with us; your influence lives on
not just in Oxide, but also in the many people that you have inspired.  You
were the best of venture capital.  Closer to the heart, you were a terrific
friend to us both; thank you.

